On half subtractor know Nick.
The idea is that now that you know how
to design half Adder and also full adder.
So now you can generalize your knowledge to
build a half subtractor or full subtractor.
So this is as a practice for you.
So you have to design 1/2 subtractor or
full subtractor based on the knowledge that
you gain from the full adder or half adder.
So the same when we designed
the half adder or full adder.
We follow the same design procedure
for designing any circuit.
So we formed the truth table or we write
the midterms and then we simplify that etc.
So the same is for half subtractor
in the half subtractor.
You are subtracting only two bits.
For the full subtractor,
you are subtracting 3 bits,
and if you need a N bit subtracter you have
to design A subtractor based on the design.
We said, uh, you can use.
N bit adder for subtraction
in twos complement,
so these are the design patterns that
you can follow for other design tasks.
So sometimes we do not cover some
digital units and we leave it to you to.
I mean you yourself practice and
design that second or that unit.
So I'm going to start today's lecture,
so let me. I think the yes,
the recording is already started.
Thank you, Aria.
So today we continue.
On a more of.
Circuits in the that that are
needed for a computer system.
So so far we covered.
Some combination logic or those law?
I mean a circuit that only you provide
the input and you see the output.
So we covered the coders.
All kind of we can say that binary code
coders so busy to access free and etc.
And we said that they were beneficial
for doing arithmetic on decimal system.
But based on the arithmetic on binary
system also for the Gray code or ASCII code,
they are very good for transmission of
the information between two systems.
And then we start with introducing some.
These are units for the arithmetic and
logical operation in terms of the.
Arithmetic we introduced binary
adder and subtractor.
What do we build the subtracter
based on the other?
Because of the idea we could we
could employ or we could use the
idea of the Two's complement in
Two's complement and subtraction is
addition with two complements or as
a result we could build a subtracter.
So today we are going to continue
with the binary multiplier and then
binary comparator an if you have
enough time we continue with the
second category which is about.
Data transmission.
As you can see here in this part
we have another digital unit which
is called decoder or encoder.
These units are a little bit different
from the binary code decoder or encoder's,
usually in the question.
It's clear that when we said decoder,
what type of decoder we mean,
so you'll see what's the difference
of these two units
with the previous binary code
decoders or encoders. So.
Oh sorry, this is not the correct.
Side haha. Sorry about this.
I have to open the.
Oh actually, I started with the
first part. I guess I have to
start this in show. And then here.
Yeah. OK, so. Let's move on
to the binary multiplier.
Now we want to build a circuit
that does multiplication so.
Multiplication as we know in the
high school algorithm is basically
repeating the addition. For instance,
if I'm going to multiply an N bit,
is a binary number we which
has N bits with another number.
For instance, Y&Y is AN bit binary number
in decimal system is an ambit digit.
So basically we can add the. XMTY times.
So. We already have the digital
units for adding, so for instance,
if you have a number X which has four bits.
And we want to multiply X by
another #3 in binary system.
So basically we could say that
we can add X three times.
So with four bit adder in putting X in
two in both inputs of the four bit adder,
so basically X1 plus X1X2 plus X2 an etc.
So let me show.
You the actual addition.
So basically you are adding X one
X2X3 and X4 with itself X one X2.
X3 and X4.
So using the four bit adder so
which becomes 2 * X and then this
is the result of the two time X.
So I again I repeat the addition
with X itself so it becomes.
So this number plus additional X.
It becomes 3 * X.
So this is one way,
but there's a problem with this design.
What is the problem?
Anybody can answer?
What's the problem with this design?
So basically we don't need any multiplier,
we can reuse the N bit other
to do the multiplication of
any number with another number.
Yes, Philip is correct.
So if I changed the second number
three to four, for instance 100,
Now I want to multiply X by 4,
so I need another adder.
So by increasing the second number I
have to change the whole hardware or
I have to go to the market and buy
additional adder to do the addition.
So by just one unit of the increase
in the second number I have.
To change the whole design
so this is not efficient,
so we need more adders an as the way
we increase the second number, the Y.
So this is not good,
so we don't use this design,
although it works, but it is not efficient.
So here is the US.
I mean the problem if you change
why you have to change the circuit.
Another way is this.
I use a four bit adder.
I input X in both inputs of the other.
So basically X + X becomes 2 *
X and then the result is 2 * X.
So I attached the outputs to inputs,
so this is the two times X one.
So I attach it as you can see
here I bring this.
Here up until here.
So it becomes 2 * X One plus X1,
which comes three times X one.
So if I attach the output of the other
to the input an wait for some time,
I see 3 * X and then after sometimes
I can see 4 * X An etc so bye.
Uh,
this loop or by this feedback
from the output to the input,
I can do the multiplication,
But the problem is that first of all we
do not know how a sequential logic or
is circuit within feedback or with the
loop from the output to the input works.
We haven't covered this
topic so we cannot know how.
We do not know how this type of secret works.
And second of all,
you have to determine when to stop.
So if you let this circuit works,
so you have to know where or when you.
I mean turn off the circuit
and see the result.
If you don't know when to stop it,
this edition actually continues forever
and you don't know the result is,
for instance, four times X 5 * X or etc.
So.
We later if we have time,
we see we can design the
multiplication by this type about.
For now this we put a question mark
here and then we leave it to the future.
How to design a second that
has a feedback or from there is
a link from output to input.
But let's use our own knowledge so
far to build a multiplier so we can
see this as a design task that we do not.
We cannot reuse the previous digital units,
so we have to design the
multiply from the scratch.
So, and we assume that for the simplicity,
we assume that we are multiplying
two unsigned numbers.
The way we started with the other.
For instance, when we add 2 numbers,
we assume that we don't have
any sign for the addition. So.
If you start with the design,
so the first simple multiplication
would be like this.
Imagine that the first input is a.
The Xinput has four bits.
And in the second number
we have only one bit.
So basically we're going to multiply X by Y,
but X has four bit and Y has one bit.
As you can see here,
if we are in the decimal system,
you simply multiply this digit by
each digit of the first number.
In any base we follow the same
algorithm we are in the binary system,
so the same algorithm But the
main difference is that these are
the binary digits zero or one.
And here is the result.
So why 1 * X One becomes M1?
Why one was supplied by X2M2 up until Y 1
* X Four which becomes M4 in any basis,
any radix spaces.
But here in the binary system these
are only the zero and one digits,
so this is the design problem, we can't.
From the truth table we put Y one here.
X1X2 up until X4 here an in the output.
We have four output functions,
so we put M1 here and two here up until four,
and then we fill out all the rows and design
each ASOP or PUS for each output function.
An simplify that, etc.
If you do that, you'll see that for
this design problem it's very simple.
Becaused if you do this at a
multiplication in binary system,
why one multiply by X one is exactly
the same as applying the and operator.
So if X is zero, Y is zero,
0 * 0 becomes zero if X is 1,
why is 1 multiplied by then becomes 0?
If LX is 0X10 Y one is 1,
result is 0 if both are one,
the result is 1.
So you see that the multiplication acts
very similar to and in binary system.
So basically the first output
for the M1 is X1 and Y1.
You can see this by the truth table as well,
but if I mean if you just calculate
that in your I mean your mind
you end up with the same thing.
For the second output,
is always equal to Y 1 * X Two,
which is Y1 and X2.
Again,
by using the truth table you end up
with the same Boolean function for M2.
I'm free and then am 4,
so basically end of the second number,
the digital second number with
each digit of the first number.
So an. Finally, if you design this,
you see that each output function
is the end of the each digit with
the the single digit of the Y.
And here is the design so.
X1 and Y1. This is the output
function X2 and with Y1M2 an etc.
So basically this circuit.
You can put it in the black box.
And you can call it a 1 bit.
Multiply by 4 bit multiplier,
so these are the inputs X1.
X2. X3 and X4.
It's going to be attached to this and
you can go to the market and buy this.
But it's very simple, it only it is only
able to multiply a given number with
another number which has only one bit.
This is only one bit.
So what if I expand this to have two bits?
So now I want to multiply X which has four
bits with another number which has 2 bits.
So very similar to the decimal
algorithm we do in the higher school.
So we start with the 1st digit of the
second number, multiply this digit with
all the digits of the first number.
So this is exactly the previous
multiplication, but when we move to
the 2nd digit of the second number,
we do a shift to the left.
This is exactly the algorithm we'd know
in the high school we shift to the left,
and we put here zero,
and then we multiply the 2nd
digit of the second number,
which each digit of the first number.
Very similar to the.
Decimal system.
So this these N 1 N 2 N 3 and four
are the multiplication of the digit,
the 2nd digit of the second number
to all digits of the first number.
And then what you do next?
You some?
These two.
So. The first
result from the first column,
as you can see here.
M 1 + 0 so because we do it
shift for the 2nd digit.
So always this is 0 so anything added
with zero is itself because the zero is
the identity element of the addition.
So this is exactly equal to M1.
So there is no need for do
addition for doing addition.
However, we have to do
addition for this part.
M2 plus N1M3 plus N2 an 4 + N three
which may end with a number here.
And Carry goes here.
And this carry
Call it for instance,
carry from this number.
This addition to here plus zero here.
Plus N 4 becomes the second,
the last digit of the multiplication.
So. The first column is very simple,
but how we can do the this edition?
We already know how to do
addition for four bits numbers,
so here we have M2M3M4N A 04 bits N 1 N,
2 N 3 and F4 four bit.
So we can you reuse the four bit
adder to do this addition instead of.
At designing this by Truth Table,
which may have.
X1 X 2X4 and then Y1Y2 and then put
all the output functions here and
then design it from the scratch.
So.
Here is the algorithm.
So basically the first digits
gonna be the same as Y1.
Multiply by X one,
but for the other outputs
we need to do addition.
This is exactly the same as
the addition with four bits.
And here is the design.
So basically we have why want in the I
mean top right side Y one the 1st digit
Y to the 2nd digit of the second number.
So this is the 2nd digit,
the second number and we have X.
Swan in the first number.
So why one multiply by each
digit of the first number?
And one and two and three and
four M1 gonna be added with zero,
which doesn't have any impacts.
Or we can simply output N1 directly,
so the 1st digit of the result
gonna be M1 directly.
However, for other outputs we have
to do why 1 multiplied by each digit
of the first number X1X2X3 and X4,
and then the result which are N1
and two up until M4 added with the.
And two and three and four.
And we can assume that there is a zero here.
So as I can see here.
So the result of the first
multiplication added with the
result of the second multiplication.
And here is the result by using 4 bit adder.
Now we are able to multiply a four bit
number with another two bit numbers.
So my question is that if we extend
this to have a multiplier that has
three bits in the second number.
So if I add a Y-3. What happens?
Anybody has any idea what changes I
have to do in the in this design to
support multiplication of X which
has four bits with the second number
with which has three bits? Any idea?
Exactly, Nick correctly says that.
So basically for free bit.
The first 2 multiplications
are exactly the same.
The only thing is that we have to support
the multiplication of this third number.
The 3rd third number multiply by each digit,
but we have to do.
Two shifts because this is for the first one,
second one an.
Now we have to start from
the third position here,
so we have to shift to two times to
the left and then start multiplication.
So as you can see here, we already
have the result of the these two.
Uh, addition.
By applying the previous circuit.
So now the only thing remains is
that I have to add another adder.
And then apply the multiplication
of with each digit of the
first number and then add them to
the result of the previous circuit.
So as a result we have N1 again,
N1 is exactly the same.
S1 which is the result of the M2 and N1,
goes directly to the output this time,
and then the other parts.
Is another 4 bit adder.
And here is the design.
So in the right side we
have the second number.
In the role wise, we have the x
So X1 multiply by X.
And then the result Y 2
* X added with them here.
And then the result.
Added with the multiplication.
Why free with the X which is P1P2 and etc.
So basically you can extend this design,
uh, to multiply a four bit number
with another 4 bit number.
So you need another adder and etc.
So this is going to be a good investigation
for you if you want to say that in general,
if I want to build a circuit with N bits
number in the 1st digit in the first number.
And the second number is M bit.
How many? Uh, output you gonna have?
As you can see here.
How many, uh, digital units do
you need to buy from the market?
For instance, how many ads do you need?
How many other do you need?
And if you want to go to the
market and buy the others,
what are the type of the others?
What's the K in K bit adders?
In our example, we multiply a 4 bit.
X. With three bits. Why?
So we need two others.
But each other was four bit adder.
And you can count the number of ads as well,
so at home, try to generalize the circuit.
If you have N bit X with N bit Y,
how many others you have to buy?
What are the types of the
others and how many?
And you have to buy.
So if you want to extend this circuit
alittle bit more to support this,
sign the numbers.
So far we just simply multiply
2 numbers without considering
the sign of the multiplication.
So again, you can think about extending
the circuit in order to support the sign.
The only thing you have to be careful
is that you know that in math a
negative number if you are multiplying
2 numbers that this sign are different.
The result gonna be positive
or negative anybody?
Negative, so basically kind of similar
approach that we deal with the I mean
overflow in addition or subtraction in
numbering system with the Two's complement.
So here you can simply you have to be
careful about the result if the sign of the
given numbers in the inputs are different,
the result is always negative.
If the sign of the given
numbers in the inputs are equal,
either both negative or positive,
the result going to be always positive.
So you have to add some more circuit
to the previous circuit in order to
provide the correct sign in the result.
So again, I leave it as an exercise
for you and also it's a nice
question for the final exam.
So think about them. I mean at home.
These are not just for, I mean, future works.
I may use some of them for the final exam,
so be careful about that.
And I think these are interesting.
I mean questions or I mean food for thought.
Uh, so basically if we could build an extent,
uh, these circuits to have other.
Subtractor an multiplier.
So you can have a divisor as well.
So a circuit that can divide 2 numbers.
So you can think of the
division as a subtraction,
multiple subtraction or design A
divisor by from the scratch by.
By the way, we introduced the multiplier.
So as you can see,
we are completing all the necessary units
for doing arithmetic in binary system.
So another important thing in
which happens in your program.
For instance,
in most of your program you want to check
the equality or not equality of two numbers.
So what is the circuit
for that on the machine?
What type of digital circuit
does the comparison?
So now I want to introduce
how can we build a comparison,
a comparator or a device or
circuit that does the comparison
between 2 numbers in binary system.
But before I introduce that,
do you have any idea about designing
a binary comparator?
The first immediate thought would
be designed from the scratch,
two stable input binary variables,
output binary variables,
simplification and etc.
But if you know that you already
built circuit for adding addition,
you already built the circuit
for subtraction multiplication.
Is it possible to reuse these
circuits to do the comparison or not?
Actually, Philip is correct.
Yes, what we do usually in comparison
is that we subtract the given
numbers an if the result is positive.
We could say that the first number is
greater or equal if the result is zero,
we could say that the given
numbers are equal.
Or if the result is negative,
we could say that the first number
is lower than the second number.
So based on this subtraction
we can determine the.
I mean, you can compare two given numbers so.
I just wanted to quickly review
how can we design the comparator.
So if you are given an unsigned,
you want to design a second that if X
is greater than Y it outputs or turn
on some lights or in some way it shows
you if they are equal or the first
number is lower than the second number.
We already designed that actually from the
from the scratch by using the truth table.
This design basically says that
it outputs one whenever the X
is greater or equal than Y.
So you can say that in
order to have a comparator,
I want to split this to two outputs greater.
I mean absolutely greater
or equal or then the lower.
So we want to design such circuit.
We need one output for this,
one output for this,
an one at fault for this and the
nice property of this design is
that if this one becomes one,
meaning that X is lower than Y.
We have to output zero for the other
two or if X is greater than Y we have
to add put zero for the other two.
So at any cases one of the
outputs going to be 1,
the other output is going to be 0.
An If you design it from the truth table,
it becomes like this.
So basically this is the design for a.
Compare comparison between 2 numbers.
Each number has 2 bits.
So as you can see here, both are zero.
Equality is 1 greater or lower is 0.
In this case, for instance,
the first number is 11 and the second number
is 01011 is greater than 01. As a result,
this is 1 and the other cases are zero,
and then you design it by the
aesopi for this one SOP. For this.
So before this annual simplify that
for instance using the corner map.
Color map of four variables and
you need 3 corner Maps for that.
Well, as I said, if you increase
the bits of the input numbers,
for instance comparison between
3 number numbers of free bits,
numbers of four bits and etc,
the December 2 table is huge
and very calm complicated.
We can use the subtracter.
We can simply say that, uh?
I put this as a synonym.
We could say that this is Phillips way.
We already know how to subtract
in Two's complement.
So in the unsigned subtraction or,
we can say that you're
subtracting 2 positive numbers.
If it is a comparison
of two unsigned numbers.
If this is a comparison
between 2 sign numbers,
we can use the same binary subtractor
and based on this sign of the.
Result you can decide whether
the first number is greater,
equal or lower than the second number.
But one thing you have to be
careful about the equality.
The result gonna be positive,
but you have to check that all the
other outputs are zero because.
If you don't check these X greater door.
Why if you only check the sign,
you cannot differentiate between
the greater or equal an equal,
so you have to be careful about
checking the other outputs to be 0.
If they are all zero,
it means that they are equal.
If one of them is not zero,
it means that X is greater around Y.
So it's very simple.
You have to add a kind of
additional andon or something to
this to the binary subtractor.
To compare 2 numbers.
I just leave it, uh,
as a for for you to review
these slides at home.
Very simple.
Just wanted to quickly and here is the
design so at home you can think about why.
By using the binary subtracter
we can design A comparator.
Is on these this visa steps?
But what I want to do
this covered now is this.
Imagine we need a.
We don't have any subtractor and we want to.
Designer comparator comparator.
Not using the truth table,
not using the previous circuits,
but by the idea of a ignore.
Why? Because if you design and
the by the idea of the action or
it becomes very fast to compare 2
numbers and in the next few slides
you see a why this design is in
terms of speed is very efficient.
I just wanted to mention that we
already said that, for instance,
for four bit subtractor or which
is internally 4 bit other.
You have to wait.
If the gates inside the
other has some delaye.
You have to wait up until you see
the last carry and then you are
sure that the result is reliable
and you can see the result.
But in this course we said that
there is no delay for the gates,
but in practice usually there's
a delay for the gates.
So if you designed yourself a
comparator by the subtraction, you may.
Experience some deley when
you want to check whether the
given numbers are greater than.
I mean, for instance,
the first number is
greater or equal or lower.
That's why we want to design the
competitor of from various scratch,
but not by using the truth table,
because it needs a lot of
input binary variables.
The Helping Gate is the exclusive
nor one in one of the lecture
assignments you had the chance to.
I mean, become familiar with the
exclusive or an exclusive nor and
the nice property of these gates.
Exclusive nor also called Equality
Gate because you already know
that based on the truth table,
if the bits in the inputs are equal,
the output of the exclusive nor. Is 1.
If both are zero, the output is 1.
If both are one, the output is 1.
However,
if the bits in the inputs are not equal,
the output is 0.
So now we want to use this nice
property of exclusive North to compare
2 numbers that have more than one bit,
for instance 4 bit numbers.
So here is an example for equality.
If you have two 4 bit numbers.
The only case that these two numbers
becomes equal is that the bits in
the X one X2X3 and X4 is exactly the
same as the bits in Y1Y2Y3 and Y4.
For instance, if this is 0010.
If the first number is
equal to the second number,
the same bits must be in the second number.
This means that if I apply exclusive
nor bitwise meaning that on each bit.
The result is always one.
You can see here the result is 1,
the result is 1.
Here an etc.
So if you blindly apply exclusive nor
on each bit of the given numbers and and
all the output bits and the result is 1,
it means that the given 2 numbers are equal.
So this is a nice or fast way to check the.
Equality of two numbers.
Bitwise exclusive nor
and then and the result.
So in C language programming you
know that this operator is exclusive
or if you apply not on top of this.
It becomes exclusive nor so try in C
language that whenever you say that,
for instance, if.
In your program we write that FX
is equal to Y, do something.
Instead of doing this way of equality check,
try to use the logical
operators in C language.
The reason is that if you
use the logical operation,
it uses the logical gates in the machine
instead of the calculating the subtraction,
and is much more faster.
Actually,
this refers to the question from Opsahl,
which says that what is I mean?
What is the benefit of knowing
the underlying hardware?
If you know that the underlying hardware
do the checking of two numbers based
on the exclusive nor an and gate,
instead of using this operator
which uses the subtraction,
you use this way to compare 2 numbers,
which is much more faster.
Although some compilers do
optimization even if you use this,
they optimize your code and they they
may change your code to use this in
order to make your program faster.
But if you do not use the
optimizer option of the compiler,
it does the subtraction which is slower.
How about the? Check with the I
mean whether the first number is
greater or than the second number.
So if. The first number is a
greater than the second number.
This is the case that happens.
If the first number has digital
one in the highest significant bit.
And the second number has zero in that a bit.
It means that if you are
in the unsigned system.
It is very evident that the first number
is greater than the second number,
so we don't have to check
the all the other bits.
It is very similar to the decimal system.
For instance is decimal system.
If I have 742 and I have another number,
for instance 351.
Instead of checking each digit,
I can first start from the left and
check the higher significant position.
If the first position 7
is greater than three,
so I don't have to check the other digits,
I can simply say that the first number
is greater than the second number.
Very similar in the binary system.
So for checking about whether the first
number is greater than the second number,
we can install from the
highest significant bit.
If in the first bit of the first
number we have one and the first bit
of the second number is 0. We are done.
The first number is greater,
so we have X4 and we don't have Y4.
So this is the result.
What if both are zero?
Oh,
one thing is that if the second
number in the highest significant
bit is 1 and the first number is 0,
so we can say that why this
time is greater than X?
Very similar to the previous condition.
If both are the same.
If both are the same, meaning that
either both are zero or both or one,
so it means that this check
doesn't lead to decide whether the
first number is greater or lower.
This means that the exclusive or of the
first highest high significant bit is 1.
So if this happens, I continue
checking the second significant bit.
Very similar to the
previous I mean condition.
Now that the exclusive or is one.
I say that if X3 is 1 and Y three is 0,
the first number is greater.
Or if X3 is zero and Y three is one, I could
say that the second number is greater.
What if both are equal?
Then I could say that if X3 exclusive nor
with Y-3 is one I have to continue with the.
Next position in the lower
in the lower significance.
And etc.
So.
The first, the highest
significant bit is equal.
We go to the lower significant bit.
If both are equal,
we go to the lower significant bit.
Ann continues this way,
so either the first bit of the first
number is 1 and the second bit of the
first bit of the second number is 0.
So if this is 1.
One or with anything else is 1,
so I can simply output one.
If both are equal,
it means that this becomes 0,
because if these two becomes equal,
for instance 0 here one here so.
So both are equal,
so zero this zero becomes not
becomes 1 one and zero becomes zero.
If these two bits are equal,
these terms becomes 0.
You have to go to the second.
This becomes one.
And the only.
Terms that determines whether the
X is greater than than one is this.
If these two are equal,
this becomes 00 and with anything becomes 0.
Now we go to this second.
Uh, to this bit, so the highest
significant bit are equal.
The next lower significant bit is equal.
Now we go to the lower significant bit Y2
and X2 and check the quality of these two.
If you have X and we don't have Y,
meaning that X is 1, why is 0?
This becomes one and the output becomes one.
If this is these two bits are equal,
this becomes zero and we go to
the Latin last, I mean bit.
So this is another way to check
whether X is greater than Y,
so we're for equality.
We apply exclusive number on each bit,
followed by the end. For greater check.
If X is greater than Y,
we have all these terms.
We start from the high significant
bit and gradually move toward
the lowest significant bit.
For the. Check for the.
Whether the X is lower than Y.
Exactly the same procedure
as previous one, so if I.
Remove all of this so
this is the great check.
For the lower check,
exactly the same procedure,
but this time X is lower than Y.
If we have we don't have any.
The bits in the X and we
have the bit in the wine.
Again, if these two equal,
this becomes zero.
This becomes one an it depends on
checking for the Y-3 Annex three.
If these are equal,
it becomes zero and we go
end up with the checking
for the Y2 and X2 and etc.
And here is the design.
So as you can see here. The equality
is basically is the end of. Let's see.
This is or followed by the not
becomes nor. So this is normal.
Here we descend is a free bar.
Be free so this is a 3/4.
Be free. And with.
This ad. This is and for the
second term, which is a 3.
And with the free bar. And then or.
So this is the exclusive or followed
by the North becomes exclusive nor.
So each output of these
terms are exclusive nor.
An all the apples of the exclusive North
goes to this and to check the equality.
For greater check, you see that,
uh, the high. Significant bit
this is the exclusive or. And.
So this. I. This inputs.
Comes from this and. And this ad.
As you can see, here goes to this second
input, here an etc so. I just let me.
Clear this one for greater check.
This is the first input that goes from here,
which is. A3. Be free bar,
which means that we have one in the
high significant bit of A and we have
zero in the high significant of P.
So basically it if this happens,
this becomes one and we don't have to
check the other inputs and outputs one.
So we can check for the other
admin combinations. And.
I just wanted to mention
that these are the exclusive
nor designed by this way.
So basically the exclusive
or followed by the nuts.
OK, any questions?
So you see that we gradually move toward a,
I mean, putting all these together to
build a machine that does the calculation.
I am ready to take your questions, if any.
No questions. So at least
give me some feedback.
Sanmi traditional way to check
that you have the focus to the.
Lecture thank you, very thank you
Nick Geo Matthew have so Nathan.
Thank you Philip.
So we have 23 three students,
so camera thank you. Thank you Michael.
OK, so seems uh, everybody has the focus so.
We don't cover any other arithmetic or any
other circuits that does the arithmetic,
so the only logical operator we check is
the I mean binary competitor that we showed.
So there are three different ways using
subtraction using the design by the exclusive
nor or designing book from the scratch.
Uh. Also, we introduce these arithmetic
units for any other arithmetic units.
You know how to design that.
So basically you know the procedure
other you design it from the scratch
or you try to come up with some idea
that reuse the previous circuits.
For instance, using the, reusing the others,
reusing the multipliers, etc so.
We keep it this simple for you just
to have the idea how to design the
arithmetic or logical operations.
I mean circuits for the computer machine.
We already covered the binary code
converters which are used for the
I mean very simple calculators.
And now we want to move toward
another important part of a computer
system data transmission circuits.
The thing is that, uh.
In the computer system,
you don't only do arithmetic,
you have to provide the input
values and then when you do the
arithmetic you have to provide a
way to restore the output result.
So they you need you have to predict
or you have to assume that there
are some circuits that they don't
do arithmetic or any operation.
The only task for them is that to
transfer the information from one part
of the system to another part of the system.
For instance,
if you want to add 2 numbers X&Y,
you have to assume that you
store X somewhere in your system.
Why somewhere in your system and you
need some device to bring the X&Y
up until the inputs of the others,
and then when you ask the other
to do the addition,
the result for instance gonna be S.
The sum of the X&Y,
so you have to provide a way to bring
or take the result S from the other
and bring it to somewhere to store,
for instance from other parts of the system.
So that's why on top of the
arithmetic or logical circuits we
need some circuits that does the
transmission of the data, but.
Within the system,
not outside the system.
We are not sending information from
one computer to another computer.
We are inside one computer system
and we want to provide or transmitted
data within or inside the system.
OK, so. In this in this part
we introduced decoders and
now you see that what we call,
I mean, uh, what's the I mean?
Same term or same word used for another
circuit an also encoder and other types.
I think we may have enough time
for the decoder, but we can leave
the others for the next week.
So let's start with the decoder.
So for the data transmission, the decoders.
So. In order to I mean remove the
confusion between the terminology.
Usually for those decoder or
encoder's for the binary codes,
we call them binary code decoders.
For instance, the BCD to excess free.
Or the other?
I mean they can to access
free or busy to Aiken etc.
We call them binary code decoders
also for the one that displays the
digital digital digit in decimal
system we call it display decoder.
Basically you input a number, for instance 9.
And the decoder displays that for you,
so the nines becomes this number.
This display.
So these are the we call this.
Sometimes we call it 7 segment because it
has seven Part 7 segment display decoder.
But now I want to introduce binary decoder
and let's see what is binary code.
Binary decoder is in terms of coding.
Algorithm is following the same concept.
It codes an input to output,
but the way it encodes is
a little bit different.
This is the algorithm for the encoding
in the OR the decoding in this second.
Basically. In the input side,
you input a binary number.
An in the output side you
have a vector that only one.
Element of the vector or one
element of the output is 1 on
all the other outputs or all the
other elements of the output is 0.
So for instance,
we call this vectors one hot vector
because only one element is hot and
all the other elements are called.
Here we have one hot vector,
for instance here.
And the way this decoder works is that.
It says that, OK,
this happens in the third position.
So if I input a binary number.
000 up until 1 one.
This is the binary number 43,
so I make the output for the third position
one on all the other positions here.
That's the way this circuit wants to work.
For now,
we don't know why we need such a circuit,
but imagine we need such as a circuit
that whenever we input a binary number,
it creates a vector that only one
element is 1 and all the other
elements are zero or one hot vector.
So as a result this is not a one hot
vector because two elements are hot.
Another element,
so we don't consider this as a one.
Hot vector.
So.
What's the benefit of if we
design circuit such a circuit?
What's the benefit?
What's the use of that? So.
Assuming that all of you know
what is CPU and what is a memory,
we later we discuss what's inside.
All of these chips an what's inside the CPU,
but assuming that you already know that any
computer system has a CPU an has a memory,
the task of the CPU is doing arithmetic or
logical operation or any type of computation,
and the task of memory is
to restore the information.
So as I said,
we have to provide a way to bring the.
Information to the CPU.
And the CPU does the calculation and
we have to come up with the idea
that bring the result back to the
memory and stored in the memory.
So.
Here are in this part we need
some circuits that does this.
Based on the idea that explained decode
such a decoder that you input a binary
number and it outputs A1 hot vector.
Uh, what's your opinion about the use
of such a decoder in a computer system?
Anybody can have a guess about this.
If somebody says that I want to design
A circuit that does does this decoding,
you input a binary number
an I output A1 hot vector.
And in another another person wants
to build a system that has a CPU.
Anna memory Ann wants to transfer
information from memory to
the CPU and vice versa.
So do you have any?
Yes, that was the use of this type
of decoder in this complex system.
The efficiency here, uh.
Efficiency misses speed, so how a decoder?
This type of decoder helps with a lot
of speed or help with more speed.
You can think you can think of
memory as a as a houses or locations
that is stored information.
Also, you can think of the CPU as a factory.
So in order to process the information
or in order to process the products,
you have to bring the products from
the warehouses or from the locations
to the factory and you process the
product in the factory and then bring
back the result to some warehouses.
But The thing is that.
When you're at the factory and you want
to bring some information or bring some
product in your factory and process that.
Assuming that you have one location here,
one location here,
here you have for instance an locations.
And you want to.
Uh, bring inside one product to your factory.
So what's the?
What's the necessary operation here?
I should Tatiana is a little bit close.
So basically the first step is that
before transferring the product or
before transferring the information,
the CPU first or the factory
should first says that where is the
location of the product or where
is the location of the information.
So imagine here we have N different
location for the informations.
One of the these locations have our
desired information and we have to
select that location 1st and then we
ask to transfer the information or that
product to the factory or to the CPU.
So that's the main use of this type
of decoder. So basically we assign.
One bit to each location.
Which is very similar to the address
of that location and then we say
that if your desired information
is in the first location.
Select the first one.
And now we know that we have to
transfer the information from the first
location to the for the processing.
If the your information is in
the second location.
Make the second location one
and the others 0.
Third location,
so at anytime your information
is only in one of the locations,
so you make it 1 just to let the
system knows that the information
is in that location and in the
second phase we start transferring
the information from that location.
So far we deal with the first step
which is selecting the location of
the information. Exactly like address.
So first we have to determine
what is the location or where the
location of the information is.
So here is the main role of
the this type of decoder.
So basically assuming we have only
two location to store the information.
The location, for instance
A and the location B.
In order to select each of these locations,
you have to say that OK.
If I want to transfer the
information from a, I make it 1.
And the other location 0.
This way I am saying that I am
selecting the first location.
Otherwise, for instance,
if you make it 0 A and then for
the B your information is in
the location B, you make B1.
So at anytime one of the locations is active,
the other locations is not active.
There is no case that you
make both of them one. Why?
Because the location at your
information is only at one location
and you need to transfer that
information from one location so.
Also. If both are zero,
meaning that you don't select
any of these locations.
It means that your information is
not in these two locations or other
locations that do information actually size.
So now let's do the first part
with selecting their locations.
Assuming you have two locations in
order to select between two locations,
you only need 1 bit.
If your input is 0.
You say that I make the output
one here and then zero here.
If the information in the second
location I change the input to one.
And in a way that it outputs the second
location one and the first location 0.
So we haven't designed this circuit yet,
but this is the desired
circuit that we want to design.
So based on one variable we can select
between two locations if it is zero,
the first location, if it is 1,
the second location.
So if we design this by two stable,
we can then call it decoder
one by two by one variable.
We can select two locations and two can
be described as 2 to the power of 1.
So let's design the inside of this circuit.
From the truth table.
We have only one variable in the input.
But we have two variables in the outputs.
If X is 0, the first output is 1,
the second output is 0.
If X is 1, the first output is 0,
the second output is 1.
So it's kind of very weird design,
but very simple.
One binary variable input in the input,
two binary variable in the app.
An if you write it as a sum of midterms,
so the zero becomes one
when we have midterm 0.
D1, the second output becomes one
whenever we have M1 or the. Mr One,
so you see that it's very nice equation.
If you label the output from the zero D1D2D3,
they become equal to the exact minter.
And here's the design.
So if it is 0.
Zero goals here.
Here becomes zero, it becomes not.
Comes one,
so the first output is 1,
the second at 0.
Let let's extend it to this second to
expand it to have more locations in
order to select between more locations,
you need more bits in the input.
So if you have two bits in the input,
what are the possibilities?
You have 00, you have 01, you have 1 zero.
You have one one, so you have four
possibilities or two to the two.
Outputs with two binary inputs you can select
among two to the power of two outputs.
As a result, you have four outputs.
You can label them between the
zero D1 up until the free,
and if you design the circuit here is
this desired an I mean behavior both 00.
Select the first location 10
select this second location.
Zero, 1:30 and 1:00. One the last location.
So you see that, as Tatiana said,
the input acts like a Postal code or address.
You provide the address for that location
and the decoder actually enables or
open the door of that location and
close the door of the other locations.
So here for instance, if you put
the address of the last location,
it opens the door of the last
location but closes the door of
the other locations at anytime.
Only one of the locations are open.
And here is the truth table. So.
You have two binary variables in the input.
You have two to the power of two
locations in the output that you
want to select or you want to
open the door of that location.
If both are zero, this is the
address for the first location.
Make it 1 and all the other outputs are zero.
If the second address 01.
The second output is open and
all the other outputs are zero.
And as you can see here,
the first output midterm 0. D1.
Middle one D2 midterm 2 and D3 mitten free.
This is a I mean nice circuit that
the main diagonal becomes one an all
the other power elements in the right
side of the two stable becomes 0.
And if we design this.
Here is the design, very simple,
so each output is the end of
the admittance, so export ybor.
So if you can see here, this is the Explorer.
And this is the Y bar.
'cause here and with each other.
So basically this is the midterm 0.
And this is my turn won an etc.
The only difference of this design is
that when one of the midterms becomes one,
the other midterms are always 0.
Or in the right side?
Uh, what is 1 hot vector
for it or it is applicable?
01 thing actually,
Tatiana says yes correct.
As you can see here.
If the input at at any time,
the output is only one hot vector.
I forgot to tell that.
So you see that at anytime the output
of the decoder in this decoder,
this design is 1 hot.
You never see the output have
for instance 2 one in the output.
That's why we called this
coding binary number to one
hot vector or a binary decoder.
And here is the design
for free bit in the input.
As a result, we gonna select 2 to the
power of 3 or 8 bits in the output,
so the decoder acts as 3 bits in the input
and one hot vector in the output which has.
8 bits in the output, an again.
As you can see here,
this is the one hot vector.
This is for the selecting the first position,
selecting the second position an attach.
And here is the design.
So you can think of this decoder
or binary decoder as a device that
selects one location out of the
many locations or a device that
generates them in terms. So.
This is Milton 0 for instance.
This is the meter 101 which is material 5,
which is equal to the D5.
When this becomes one,
all the other outputs are zero.
You can check that so 101 so if you
put one here 0 here one here and you
trace the circuit etapas one here
and all the other aspects are there.
Exactly exactly, so that's the formula.
So basically, let's back to the here.
If you have N in the input,
so the input is N bit, the output
gonna be 2 to the power of N.
So if you output is 5,
so you have 5 bits in the input.
In the output, you want to select
2 to the power of five locations,
so this is the size of the
one hot vector in the output.
Which is equal to. What's the number of 32?
Yeah, so you select between 32 locations.
So depending on how many locations
you want to select you design or
select or buy from the market,
the decoders that can that
is able to select those like
collections of those locations.
For instance if you want to select out of
10 locations how many what's the decoder?
Decoder one how many bits in the
input and two to the power of
what number selects 10 locations?
Oh no, we have 10 locations in the output.
So we have 10 locations in the output.
How many bits in the input
we need if I put one,
it becomes 2 to the power of 1,
two locations, 2 becomes 2 to the power of 2,
four locations 2 to the power,
three becomes two. If I put 3.
Becomes 2 to the power of three,
which becomes 8 locations,
but I have had locations so I
need 4 bits to select among two
to the power of 416 locations.
I have 10 locations only so I I
waste the other five locations,
but I have to buy a decoder
for by two to the Barber four,
or in another way you could say
that the ceiling of log of the.
Outputs.
yeah, OK. We're done with today's lecture.
We're going to continue with the code here.
How about selecting from
millions of locations?
So we need to design bigger decoders
because you know that the memory in the
current computer systems have, for instance,
four Gigabit Big GB memory location.
So 4 gigabyte means that.
4 billion locations.
How can we design A decoder that
had that can select one location
out of all of these locations?
So we continue this next week?
Thank you so much for your attendance
and I am happy to take your questions.
Also I'm going to be in the office hour so
individual office to take your questions.
Thank you
I'm going to stop there.